Release Notes PMM 2.33.0 (#932)
percona/pmm-doc: docs/release-notes/2.33.0.md

# Percona Monitoring and Management 2.33.0

| **Release date:** | Dec 13, 2022                                                                                    |
| ----------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Installation:** | [Installing Percona Monitoring and Management](https://www.percona.com/software/pmm/quickstart) |

Percona Monitoring and Management (PMM) is an open source database monitoring, management, and observability solution for MySQL, PostgreSQL, and MongoDB.

!!! caution alert alert-warning "Important"
    We recommend using the latest version of PMM. This ensures that you have access to the latest PMM features and that your environment runs on the latest version of the underlying components, such as VictoriaMetrics, with all the bug fixes in place.

## Release Highlights

> ### High Availability in PMM

Reviewer: What about using this as the header instead of "High Availibility in PMM" ?
Prevent data loss with VM integration for short outages

> ### High Availability in PMM

Author: @dygksy I do not completely agree with this. It's a part of HA. We want this to be highlighted right? Morever, we are mentioning it will be released in stages...

> 

Reviewer: Let's put the main benefit here before HA explanation? After this paragraph, we can link with HA in PMM epic?

> If PMM Server goes down, metrics will be buffered on the monitored instance until PMM Server comes back online, which is when metrics will get pushed to PMM Server. Note that this only applies to PMM Clients which run in the so-called push mode. The same holds true when a brief network outage occurs on the client side.

Reviewer: Roma suggested a different description like this:

> When the connection between  DB and PMM is broken for a short period (what ? ) the data will be back when connection restored. So you  have visibility on behavior even when the network is broken."

> We are excited to share our roadmap for High Availability (HA) in PMM, a new solution that our users have been anticipating. HA will provide your PMM near-zero downtime and wil ensure monitoring without data loss during a failover.

Reviewer: Can we start a sentence like this;
"... The solution mentioned above is the part of bigger solution that many PMM users are waiting for. ...."

To ensure a smooth rollout, HA in PMM will be introduced in phases, in line with your requirements and feedback, with PMM 2.33.0 being the starting point. 

!!! caution alert alert-warning "Important"

>     PMM HA will be rolled out in three stages. Stage one is included with PMM 2.33.0 and stages two and three will be rolled out next year.

Reviewer: what we re releasing is not understood here. Please highlight the released part.

The following features/use cases will be covered as part of the various stages of HA in PMM:

> 

Reviewer: Is it possible to put a link for users to book a meeting with us to provide feedback or share their needs related to HA?

Author: Let me confirm...

|**Stages of HA in PMM**              | **Solutions Provided**          |
|-------------------------------------|---------------------------------|
|**Stage one**           |As an initial step towards preventing data loss we have developed the following:<br><br>**Prevent data loss with VM integration for short outages**<br>If PMM Server goes down, metrics will be buffered on the monitored instance until PMM Server comes back online, which is when metrics will get pushed to PMM Server. Note that this only applies to PMM Clients which run in the so-called `push` mode. The same holds true when a brief network outage occurs on the client side.|

> |**Stage two**           |As part of PMM HA stage two in HA we plan to implement the following:<br><br>**HA data sources**<br>As part of stage two we will let the users use external data sources therby decreasing dependency on the file system.

Reviewer: Can we add 2023 tag for Stage 2 and Stage 3?

Author: Sure

|**Stage three**         |As part of PMM HA stage three we plan to implement the following:<br><br>**Clusterized HA**<br>Clustered PMM will be the focus of stage three. Detailed information will be included in the upcoming release notes.

### Guided tour of Percona Alerting

Following the recent improvements to PMM Alerting, we have added a short tutorial to help you explore our streamlined alerting system based on Grafana.
The in-app tutorial automatically pops up when you first open the **Alerting** page to help you uncover the fundamentals of Percona Alerting.

 
### Restore MongoDB backups easier

Building on the significant improvements for MongoDB Backup Management introduced in the previous release. We are now simplifying the process for restoring physical MongoDB backups.
Starting with this release, you can restore physical backups straight from the UI and PMM will handle the process end-to-end. Prior to this, you would require to perform additional manual steps to restart your MongoDB database service so that your applications could make use of the restored data.

> ### Components Upgrade

Reviewer: I do not know whether we should put upgrades to highlight section. @rnovikovP what do you think?

Author: @catalinaadam

Reviewer 2: This is a good improvement for the Restore process.  So you don't need to go to Linux and restart tools manually.

> ### Components Upgrade

Reviewer: I do not know whether we should put upgrades to the highlight section. @rnovikovP what do you think?

- VictoriaMetrics has been upgraded from 1.77.1 to 1.82.1.
- As part of PMM 2.33.0, grafana has been updated to 9.2.5, which fixes some critical vulnerabilities. For more information, see [grafana 9.2.5](https://grafana.com/blog/2022/11/08/security-release-new-versions-of-grafana-with-critical-and-moderate-fixes-for-cve-2022-39328-cve-2022-39307-and-cve-2022-39306/)

## New Features

- [PMM-10889](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-10889) - Starting with PMM2.33.0, while using the pmm-admin CLI command, you do not have to know the entire command. Just type the initial command and press Tab. The rest of the command will be autocompleted.

    Depending on the shell you are using, add the following to your shells .rc file for autocomplete to work:

    ```sh
    source <(pmm-admin completion -c <your shell>)
    E.g. source <(pmm-admin completion -c bash)
    ```

> - [PMM-10955](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-10955) - Timestamps for point-in-time recovery (PITR) restore. 
> 
>     After restoring a PITR backup, you can now check the timestamp which the restore was performed to and the time when the restore was finalized. This information is available in the new **Finished at** column and **PITR timestamp** field in restore additional info under **Backup > Restores**. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [PMM-10955](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-10955) - Display timestamps for point-in-time recovery (PITR) restores and Finished at for all restores. 

    For PITR backup restores, you can now check the timestamp which the restore was performed to and (for all restores) the time when the restore was finalized. This information is available in the new **Finished at** column and **PITR timestamp** field in restore additional info under **Backup > Restores**. 
```

Author: @catalinaadam

## Improvements

- [PMM-7000](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-7000): [HA]: Staring with PMM 2.33.0, if the PMM Server goes down, metrics will be buffered on the monitored instance until PMM Server goes back online, which is when metrics will get pushed to the PMM Server. 

- [PMM-10901](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-10901): [Documentation]: To enable the users to use High Availability easily, we have added exclusive documentation for HA.

- [PMM-8516](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8516): [Backup Management]:  When creating an a backup, the Vendor field was not automatically populated in the Back-up on demand dialog. This issue is now fixed. 

- [PMM-10627](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-10627): [DBaaS]: You can now create a single node cluster for PSMDB. 
 
 - [PMM-10855](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-10855): Avoid massive gRPC messages formatting for disabled log level

- [PMM-10903](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-10903): [DBaaS]: To simplify DBaas, you no longer have to manually enter the Public Address on the **PMM Settings > Advanced Settings** page. With DBaaS enabled, PMM will automatically detect and populate the **Public Address**.

> - [PMM-11085](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-11085): [Backup Management]: We've temporarily removed the **Create backup** option under **All backups** page > **Actions** menu because this option can only create on-demand backups. You can continue to create both on-demand and scheduled backups using the **Create backup** button on this page. 

Reviewer 3: Not sure if `temporarily` is a good word here. Probably we shouldn't promise it's not forever cuz we have plans to rework the UI heavily.

Author: @catalinaadam

- [PMM-10135](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-10135): Due to its limited use, the **Examples** tab has been disabled in PMM 2.33.0. Also, to safeguard our user's privacy, we have removed Personally Identifiable Information (PII) from the **Explain** tab.

- [PMM-8655](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8655): Latest state of agents is now available on the PMM server after the connection is re-established between the client and server.

- [PMM-10969](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-10969): VictoriaMetrics operator has been upgraded from 0.24 to 0.29.0.

- [PMM-10554](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-10554): Postgres collector now provides runtime duration for scrapes at the collector level. As a result, we can identify collectors who take too long. By utilizing this data, corrective action can be taken.

- [PMM-10629](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-10629): [Components Upgrade]: VictoriaMetrics has been upgraded from 1.77.1 to 1.82.1.

## Bugs Fixed

> - [PMM-10683](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-10858): In specific environments, including AWS, some EPEL repository mirrors did not respond within the time limit defined by `pmm-update`, currently set to 30 seconds. This was causing `supervisord` to kill `pmm-update-checker`, the component responsible for verifying if a newer version of the PMM Server is available for upgrade. This issue has been resolved now.

Reviewer 4: This should be [PMM-10858] instead of [PMM-PMM-10683]

Author: Thanks will fix it.

### Components Upgrade

- VictoriaMetrics has been upgraded from 1.77.1 to 1.82.1.
- As part of PMM 2.33.0, grafana has been updated to 9.2.5, which fixes some critical vulnerabilities. For more information, see [grafana 9.2.5](https://grafana.com/blog/2022/11/08/security-release-new-versions-of-grafana-with-critical-and-moderate-fixes-for-cve-2022-39328-cve-2022-39307-and-cve-2022-39306/)

## New Features

- [PMM-10889](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-10889) - Starting with PMM2.33.0, while using the pmm-admin CLI command, you do not have to know the entire command. Just type the initial command and press Tab. The rest of the command will be autocompleted.

    Depending on the shell you are using, add the following to your shells .rc file for autocomplete to work:

    ```sh
    source <(pmm-admin completion -c <your shell>)
    E.g. source <(pmm-admin completion -c bash)
    ```

- [PMM-10955](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-10955) - Timestamps for point-in-time recovery (PITR) restore. 

>     After restoring a PITR backup, you can now check the time when you started the restore and the time when the restore was finalized. This information is available in the new **Started at** and **Finished at** columns under **Backup > Restores**. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    After restoring a PITR backup, you can now check the timestamp which the restore was performed to and the time when the restore was finalized. This information is available in the new **Finished at** column and **PITR timestamp** field in restore additional info under **Backup > Restores**. 
```

| ----------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Installation:** | [Installing Percona Monitoring and Management](https://www.percona.com/software/pmm/quickstart) |

Percona Monitoring and Management (PMM) is an open source database monitoring, management, and observability solution for MySQL, PostgreSQL, and MongoDB.

!!! caution alert alert-warning "Important"
    We recommend using the latest version of PMM. This ensures that you have access to the latest PMM features and that your environment runs on the latest version of the underlying components, such as VictoriaMetrics, with all the bug fixes in place.

## Release Highlights

### Data loss prevention through VictoriaMetrics integration

If PMM Server goes down, metrics will be buffered on the monitored instance until PMM Server comes back online, which is when metrics will get pushed to PMM Server. This only applies to PMM Clients which run in the `push mode`. The same holds true when a brief network outage occurs on the client side.

> The first step towards HA in PMM is the implementation of this improvement. Furthermore, we are happy to provide our users with a roadmap that includes the implementation of High Availability (HA) in PMM, a new solution they have been anticipating. In the event of a failover, your PMM setup will experience near-zero downtime, and monitoring will continue without any data loss.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The first step towards  PMM HA solution is the implementation of this improvement. Furthermore, we are happy to provide our users with a roadmap that includes the implementation of Highly Available (HA) PMM, a new solution they have been anticipating. In the event of a failover, your PMM setup will experience near-zero downtime, and monitoring will continue without any data loss.
```

> To ensure a smooth rollout, HA in PMM will be introduced in phases, in line with your requirements and feedback, with PMM 2.33.0 being the starting point. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
To ensure a smooth rollout, PMM HA solution will be introduced in phases, in line with your requirements and feedback, with PMM 2.33.0 being the starting point. 
```

!!! caution alert alert-warning "Important"

>     HA in PMM will be rolled out in three stages. Stage one of HA in PMM is the implementation to prevent data loss with VictoriaMetrics integration for short outages. HA stages two and three will be rolled out next year.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    PMM HA solution will be rolled out in three stages. Stage one of PMM HA is the implementation to prevent data loss with VictoriaMetrics integration for short outages. HA stages two and three will be rolled out next year.
```

> The following features/use cases will be covered as part of the various stages of HA in PMM:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The following features/use cases will be covered as part of the various stages of PMM HA:
```

> |**Stages of HA in PMM**              | **Solutions Provided**          |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
|**Stages of PMM HA**              | **Solutions Provided**          |
```

- [PMM-10683](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-10683): [DBaaS]: While registering a K8s cluster on the **Manage Components Versions** modal, the versions were not getting unchecked. The issue has now been resolved.

- [PMM-10637](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-10637): Fixed an issue where the queries for some panels on the PostgreSQL Instance Summary dashboards were broken.

- [PMM-10732](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-10732): Checking the select all checkbox on the **Services**, **Agents**, and **Nodes** modal in the **PMM Inventory** window deleted all entries on all the pages. The issue has been resolved now.

- [PMM-10983](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-10983): Some panels on the dashboards were showing only short names. The issue has been resolved now.

- [PMM-10996](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-10996): [Backup Management]: Fixed an issue where the initial description text for a storage location could not be updated.

> - [PMM-11029](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-11029): There was typo on the Home dashboard: **COMMAND CENTER** graphs. This has been fixed now.

Reviewer 6: Is this number correct? Because https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-11029 its related to bug in QAN.

Author: Fixed the number. Thanks for pointing out.

!!! caution alert alert-warning "Important"
    We recommend using the latest version of PMM. This ensures that you have access to the latest PMM features and that your environment runs on the latest version of the underlying components, such as VictoriaMetrics, with all the bug fixes in place.

## Release Highlights

### High Availability in PMM

We are excited to share our roadmap for High Availability (HA) in PMM, a new solution that our users have been anticipating. HA provides a unique architectural design with near-zero downtime for your PMM setup and ensures monitoring without data loss during a failover.

To ensure a smooth rollout, PMM HA will be introduced in phases, in line with your requirements and feedback, with PMM 2.33.0 being the starting point. 

!!! caution alert alert-warning "Important"
    PMM HA will be rolled out in three stages. Stage one will be included with PMM 2.33.0 and stages two and three will be rolled out next year.

The following features/use cases will be covered as part of the various stages of HA in PMM:

**Stage 1**

As a first step toward preventing data loss, we have developed the following solution:

> **Prevent data loss with VM integration for short outages**

Reviewer 5: this should be somehow better indented - as now it is the same indent level as `Stage ` . Maybe shifted a little bit right. same for other stages. As it hard to follow what is what.

 
### Restore MongoDB backups easier

Building on the significant improvements for MongoDB Backup Management introduced in the previous release. We are now simplifying the process for restoring physical MongoDB backups.
Starting with this release, you can restore physical backups straight from the UI instead of using Percona Server for MongoDB. In addition, you no longer need to perform additional manual operations after restoring the physical Backup.

### Components Upgrade

- VictoriaMetrics has been upgraded from 1.77.1 to 1.82.1.
- As part of PMM 2.33.0, grafana has been updated to 9.2.5, which fixes some critical vulnerabilities. For more information, see [grafana 9.2.5](https://grafana.com/blog/2022/11/08/security-release-new-versions-of-grafana-with-critical-and-moderate-fixes-for-cve-2022-39328-cve-2022-39307-and-cve-2022-39306/)

## New Features

[PMM-10889](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-10889) - Starting with PMM2.33.0, while using the pmm-admin CLI command, you do not have to know the entire command. Just type the initial command and press Tab. The rest of the command will be autocompleted.

> Depending on the shell you are using, add the following to your shells .rc file for autocomplete to work:

Reviewer 5: also indent issue, please move right so it would be under the feature, not on the same level

- [PMM-10135](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-10135): Due to its limited use, the **Examples** tab has been disabled in PMM 2.33.0. Also, to safeguard our user's privacy, we have removed Personally Identifiable Information (PII) from the **Explain** tab.

- [PMM-8655](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8655): Latest state of agents is now available on the PMM server after the connection is re-established between the client and server.

- [PMM-10969](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-10969): Victoria Metris operator has been upgraded from 0.24 to 0.29.0.

- [PMM-10554](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-10554): Postgres collector now provides runtime duration for scrapes at the collector level. As a result, we can identify collectors who take too long. By utilizing this data, corrective action can be taken.

> - [PMM-10629](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-10629): [Components Upgrade:] VictoriaMetrics has been upgraded from 1.77.1 to 1.82.1.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- [PMM-10629](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-10629): [Components Upgrade]: VictoriaMetrics has been upgraded from 1.77.1 to 1.82.1.
```

# Percona Monitoring and Management 2.33.0

| **Release date:** | Dec 13, 2022                                                                                    |
| ----------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Installation:** | [Installing Percona Monitoring and Management](https://www.percona.com/software/pmm/quickstart) |

Percona Monitoring and Management (PMM) is an open source database monitoring, management, and observability solution for MySQL, PostgreSQL, and MongoDB.

!!! caution alert alert-warning "Important"
    PMM upgrade fails for versions prior to 2.33.0. Even though we have a [workaround](2.33.0.md#known-issues), we highly recommend using the latest version of PMM. This ensures that you have access to the latest PMM features and that your environment runs on the latest version of the underlying components with all the bug fixes in place.

## Release Highlights

### Data loss prevention solution for PMM server outages

> Starting with PMM 2.33.0, we have introduced a new solution to prevent data loss with PMM. In case of a network outage between PMM server and PMM client, metrics are not collected. This causes a loss of historical data, which can be important when analyzing trends, diagnosing problems, or investigating an issue from an earlier period. 

Reviewer 7: let's write issues we had in the past tense

 
- [PMM-10855](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-10855): Avoid massive gRPC messages formatting for disabled log level

- [PMM-10903](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-10903): [DBaaS]: To simplify DBaas, you no longer have to manually enter the Public Address on the **PMM Settings > Advanced Settings** page. With DBaaS enabled, PMM will automatically detect and populate the **Public Address**.

- [PMM-11085](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-11085): [Backup Management]: We've removed the **Create backup** option under **All backups** page > **Actions** menu because this option can only create on-demand backups. You can continue to create both on-demand and scheduled backups using the **Create backup** button on this page. 

- [PMM-10881](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-10881): [CVE]: As part of PMM 2.33.0, grafana was updated to 9.2.5, which fixes some critical vulnerabilities. For more information, see [grafana 9.2.5](https://grafana.com/blog/2022/11/08/security-release-new-versions-of-grafana-with-critical-and-moderate-fixes-for-cve-2022-39328-cve-2022-39307-and-cve-2022-39306/).

> - [PMM-10135](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-10135): Due to its limited use, the **Examples** tab has been disabled in PMM 2.33.0. Also, to safeguard our user's privacy, we have removed Personally Identifiable Information (PII) from the **Explain** tab.

Reviewer 6: @rasika-chivate We should change ticket to https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-10385 since 10135 is parent one for all agent types and we implemented only MySQL in 2.33. 

Also could we change description? Because its not completely true.

On something like: To safeguard our user's privacy, we have removed Personally Identifiable Information (PII) from the **Explain** tab. Right now you cannot see any sensitive data there and if needed you will be prompt to fulfill values for explain.
